JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I
am Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Wisconsin's primary
sets a potential turning point
in the presidential
race, as both party's
front-runners are handed
a loss.
Also ahead this Wednesday: a
dangerous rise
in diabetes. The World Health
Organization
announces the number of adult
cases quadrupled
globally in less than 40 years.
With this year's predicted
strongest El Nino
on record, scientists step up
their efforts
to better understand the weather
pattern when
forecasts predict the worst.
BILL PATZERT, NASA
Climatologist: When these
events impose themselves on the
climate system,
everybody on the planet feels
it. And the
droughts, floods are
spectacular, and they're
global.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And remembering
Merle Haggard,
one of country music's original
outlaws, who
died today at 79.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's on to New
York in the
presidential campaign, after
Wisconsin voters
shook up the race.
Republican Ted Cruz and Democrat
Bernie Sanders
won big in the Badger State on
Tuesday. The
candidates they are chasing,
Donald Trump
and Hillary Clinton, aim to do a
lot better
in New York, which is home to
both. We will
have a full report after the
news summary.
In the day's other news:
Pharmaceutical giant
Pfizer and its Irish rival
Allergan called
off a record merger agreement.
The deal would
have saved Pfizer hundreds of
millions of
dollars in taxes by moving its
corporate address
overseas. But, on Monday, the
Obama administration
imposed rules to block such
so-called tax
inversions.
At the White House today,
spokesman Josh Earnest
rejected criticism from the drug
companies.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
Most corporate leaders in
America understand
that a strong American economy
is good for
their business. And the concern
that we have
is with the leaders of some
corporations that
are looking to take the best of
America without
making a contribution to the
success of our
country. And that is wrong.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The merger would
have been
worth $160 billion.
Former coal executive Don
Blankenship was
sentenced to a year in federal
prison for
a mine disaster that killed 29
people. Blankenship
was CEO of Massey Energy, which
owned the
Upper Big Branch Mine in West
Virginia when
an explosion hit six years ago
yesterday.
His sentencing today came after
a federal
jury convicted him of conspiracy
to violate
safety standards. He was
acquitted of more
serious charges.
New signs are emerging that the
flow of migrants
from Turkey to the Greek islands
is finally
slowing. The Turkish coast guard
reports that
it stopped 68 people trying to
cross the Aegean
Sea today. That is down sharply
from 225 yesterday.
Turkey's prime minister says it
shows a deal
with the European Union to
deport illegal
migrants is having an effect.
More world leaders found
themselves on the
defensive today over offshore
investments.
They were detailed this week in
a massive
leak of documents, the so-called
Panama Papers.
British Prime Minister David
Cameron said
today that his family will not
benefit from
offshore funds or trusts in the
future.
And in Tokyo, Ukraine's
President Petro Poroshenko
said that his offshore holdings
were a blind
trust that he created once he
took office.
PETRO POROSHENKO, Ukrainian
President: The
only purpose of that was a
transparent separation
of business of the Ukrainian
president from
any political influence. This is
absolutely
normal procedure, and I think
this is the
main difference from the blaming
all the political
figures in this Panama list.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today, the
documents leak
led police in Switzerland to
raid the headquarters
of European soccer's governing
body. They
are focused on a TV contract
that could be
linked to a bribery scandal.
Governments around the world
carried out more
executions last year than at any
time since
1990. Amnesty International
reports more than
1,600 people were put to death
in 2015. Almost
90 percent of the executions
came in three
countries: Iran, Saudi Arabia
and Pakistan.
There were 28 executions in the
U.S., the
lowest number since 1991.
Amnesty says it's
believed that China executes
thousands of
people every year, but won't
confirm any figures.
Back in this country, investment
brokers are
going to have to meet a higher
standard when
they advise people on
retirement. Labor Department
rules issued say advisers act as
fiduciaries,
legally required to put a
client's best interest
above all else. They also have
to disclose
fees they are paid to recommend
a given investment.
The rules will be phased in next
year.
On Wall Street, stocks broke out
of a two-day
slump thanks to gains in the
health care and
energy sectors. The Dow Jones
industrial average
climbed 112 points to close at
17716. The
Nasdaq rose 76 points, and the
S&P 500 added
21.
And the University of
Connecticut celebrated
today, after the women's
basketball team won
their fourth straight national
championship.
The Huskies routed Syracuse last
night 82-51.
It marked the 11th championship
overall for
coach Geno Auriemma, the most in
college basketball
history.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
all eyes
on New York, as the presidential
front-runners
suffer setbacks in Wisconsin;
the underlying
cause of a global spike in
diabetes; and much
more.
Already, the 2016 spotlight has
shifted to
the next two major campaign
battlegrounds,
New York and Pennsylvania. Ted
Cruz, fresh
off his win in Wisconsin's
Republican primary,
paid a visit today to the Big
Apple. There,
he was forced to defend his
criticism earlier
in this campaign of front-runner
Donald Trump's
what he called New York values.
Cruz pointed to what one
Hispanic pastor told
him today about what's wrong
about New York
politics and the values that
drive them.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
We fight them every day in our
country. We
fight them. They're the values
that led, for
example, Mayor Bill de Blasio,
liberal Democrat,
of getting elected there.
One of the first things he did
was try to
shut down charter schools in
Harlem, because
he is captive to the union
bosses who control
him, so one of his first actions
was to try
to throw young African-American
and Hispanic
kids out of the schools that
were giving them
hope and giving them a lifeline.
Those are the values. It's the
values of the
liberal Democratic politicians
that have been
hammering the people of New York
for a long
time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump, for
his part,
has a rally scheduled this
evening in Long
Island, while Ohio Governor John
Kasich was
off the trail today.
On the Democratic side, Bernie
Sanders is
moving on to Pennsylvania with
his Wisconsin
win last night under his belt.
But the Democratic
front-runner once again took aim
at Sanders'
ability to turn his rhetoric
into reality.
Here's what Hillary Clinton said
today at
an AFL-CIO convention in
Philadelphia.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I am concerned that some of his
ideas just
won't work because the numbers
don't add up.
Others won't even pass Congress,
or they rely
on Republican governors suddenly
having a
conversion experience and
becoming progressive,
while, in a number of important
areas, he
doesn't have a plan at all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To dig into last
night's results
in Wisconsin and perhaps tell us
what it could
mean for the road ahead, we are
joined by
Ron Brownstein, who writes for
"The Atlantic"
and "National Journal,"
specializing in the
demographics of the nation's
politics, and
Dante Chinni. He's director of
the American
Communities Project, a
county-by-county look
at the U.S. electorate. He is
also a politics
reporter for The Wall Street
Journal.
And we welcome you both to the
program.
DANTE CHINNI, American
Communities Project:
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good to see you.
So, let's talk about -- a little
bit about
breaking down that vote
yesterday, Ron, in
Wisconsin. What did you see from
what voters
did, how they voted that tells
us anything
about what's happening?
RON BROWNSTEIN, "National
Journal": The short
version, Judy, is that it
reconfirmed the
patterns we have seen on the
Democratic side
and it broke the patterns we
have seen on
the Republican side.
On the Democratic side, we saw
Bernie Sanders
strong where he has been strong,
dominant
among young people, and
surprisingly competitive
among working-class white voters
in the Midwest.
He's now won them in every
state, except for
Ohio, where the two of them ran
even.
So he has shown that he can
continue to be
very strong in states that are
predominantly
white and where the share of
vote cast by
Democrats is lower. Hillary
Clinton maintained
her strength among
African-American voters,
which is critical going into the
big diverse
battlegrounds to come, New York,
Pennsylvania,
California, New Jersey.
On the Republican side, the
patterns broke
substantially. Ted Cruz did
better among voters,
particularly those who are not
evangelicals,
than he's done before. The
question will be
whether that was a one-time
anomaly or that's
a new pattern in the race.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you see,
Dante, when
you look at Wisconsin?
DANTE CHINNI: Well, one thing
that struck
me on the Republican side in
particular was
it really did seem that we have
been waiting
a long time to see who this
establishment
candidate was going to be on the
Republican
side.
We had Marco Rubio. He went
away. We had some
earlier folks. We had Jeb Bush.
We even had
Scott Walker. And it really did
look -- last
night, it looked like the
establishment said,
OK, we're going on all in Ted
Cruz, we're
going, which is remarkable. To
say that, a
year ago, that Ted Cruz has
become the candidate
of the establishment, that
honestly...
(CROSSTALK)
RON BROWNSTEIN: It's 2:00 a.m.
and closing
time at the bar.
DANTE CHINNI: Exactly.
RON BROWNSTEIN: The Republican
establishment...
(CROSSTALK)
DANTE CHINNI: Time to go. Time
to go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But that you're
looking at
a lot of endorsements. And
you're right. It
does -- at this point, it looks
like that's
where they're coalescing.
Well, let's -- we have some
graphics here,
Ron. Let's talk about something
you say you
have seen in really all the
primaries so far.
And you just referred to it that
helps us
understand the Republican vote.
And it has
to do with on the Republican
side who is winning
the white college grads and
non-college grads.
RON BROWNSTEIN: Right.
So, look, what Donald Trump has
done is fracture
the Republican Party along a new
line of division.
Now, in the past, Republican
races have been
defined mostly by ideology and
religious affiliation.
You had one candidate who was
more moderate,
somewhat conservative voters,
and also non-evangelicals,
another candidate who tends to
be more conservative
and evangelicals.
Trump has replaced that with a
new divide
along the lines of education. As
you look
at that map, he has won voters
who are white
college graduates in only eight
of the 21
states. In the cumulative exit
polls, he's
carried about a third of them.
He has been
dominant, though, Judy, among
those non-college
white voters in the Republican
primary. He's
won them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The next graphic.
RON BROWNSTEIN: He's won them
now, yes, in
17 of the first 20 states.
And one of the things that was
significant
last night, he's won about 45
percent of them.
So, in most states, the pattern
has been Trump
loses the college voters usually
pretty narrowly,
and wins the non-college voters
by big margins.
Last night in Wisconsin, we saw
something
very different.
We saw him lose the college
voters by a very
big margin, almost 20 points.
And he also
lost the non-college white
voters, only the
fourth time he's done that in
the 21 sees
with exit polls.
That was one of the key
questions. Is that,
again, a one-time confluence of
events that
makes Wisconsin unique, or is
this a new pattern?
By the way, new polling out
tonight in New
York suggests it may have been a
one-time
event, at least as compared to
his home state.
It's got to be proven that Cruz
can sustain
the advantages we saw in
Wisconsin. But there's
no question that Trump has
upended the usual
order in the Republican primary
by building
his blue-collar coalition that
transcends
the usual geographic divides.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know
Wisconsin voters
were bombarded with this
campaign for the
last few weeks. And now New York
voters are
about to experience the same
thing.
So, Dante, you have been looking
at something
related, but it's not exactly.
You have been
looking at how suburban voters
are looking
at this election. What you have
found? And
we have a graphic on this, too.
DANTE CHINNI: Well, the one
thing I have noticed
looking at the data throughout
the election,
and even going in, is that
Republicans need
to win the suburbs to win the
general election.
It's very important to them.
They have been
losing in the suburbs for a long
time. In
the last election, say, in 2008
-- 2012 -- sorry
-- Barack Obama won these
suburban places
by about 16 points in the
breakdown that I
used for the American
Communities Project.
I looked at head-to-head data
between Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump. She's
winning in
those places now by like 32
points. She's
doubled the advantage. And we're
seeing in
-- what we're seeing in these
primaries is
Trump cannot win in these
places, and it revealed
itself again last night.
You look at that map. Where does
he win? He
wins Milwaukee, he wins
Waukesha, Washington.
He wins over to Dane, which is
where Madison
is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is the
county, Dane County.
DANTE CHINNI: Yes. Yes.
And then he wins up a little bit
around Green
Bay, Appleton. But when you get
up in those
rural areas, that's all Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But there are
suburbs and there
are suburbs. Are you talking
inner suburbs?
Or -- because we know, today, a
city, there's
sprawl.
DANTE CHINNI: Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there are
places where
suburbs become almost rural.
DANTE CHINNI: Absolutely, and
exurbs, right,
and exurban areas.
And that's been -- those places
have been
fairly good for Republicans in
the past. And
even when I look at the
breakdown, the head-to-head
numbers with Trump and Hillary
Clinton, he
still holds down the Republican
edge in those
places, but he's way down. He
doesn't have
the edge that, say, Mitt Romney
had.
(CROSSTALK)
RON BROWNSTEIN: There has been
some commentary,
even from Trump himself, that he
is winning
because he is transforming the
Republican
electorate. That's not really
happening.
If you look at the share of the
vote cast
by Republicans, it is basically
the same as
it was in 2012. There has not
been this big
upsurge of Democrats and
independents. And
Trump has won Republicans in
every state that
he has won except Missouri.
What he has done, Judy, is taken
the existing
coalition and divide it in a new
way. He has
basically achieved what someone
like Pat Buchanan
or Rick Santorum tried and
failed to do. He's
consolidated this blue-collar
half of the
party in a way that no one has
done before.
And really for the first time in
a divided
primary, the blue-collar side is
driving the
result, and the white-collar
side is the fragmented
one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, just
quickly, we
want to turn to the Democrats
here, because,
Ron, you have also looked at
that, and frankly
how it is divided by race, how
Hillary Clinton
and Bernie Sanders have divided
the white
voters. And we have got a
graphic on that.
RON BROWNSTEIN: Right.
Well, look, Sanders started as
the classic
wine track candidate. He was a
candidate of
basically white-collar whites,
vocal liberals,
and young people. He's doing
incredibly well
among young people, among 70
percent overall.
But he has expanded beyond that.
He is now
competitive among those
blue-collar whites.
He has won all white voters in
every state
outside of the South except for
Ohio and Iowa.
She has dominated among white
voters in the
South. And that's allowed him to
compete far
beyond the kind of wine track
states like
an Oregon, say, or a Vermont and
New Hampshire.
What he hasn't done, though,
yet, Judy, is
cross that second hill, which is
the diversity
of the Democratic Party. And the
challenge
that creates for him is that, on
the Democratic
side, every large state is
diverse, and she
has won every large state,
except for Michigan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meaning
African-American voters.
(CROSSTALK)
RON BROWNSTEIN: African-American
and Hispanic
voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Asian voters.
RON BROWNSTEIN: And until he
breaks that pattern,
that is his task in the
remaining contests,
New York, Pennsylvania,
California, and New
Jersey.
DANTE CHINNI: The one thing you
also see with
Bernie Sanders that is
interesting, while
he's winning these rural -- he's
winning rural
white places.
There are aspects to Bernie. We
all think
about him as, yes, he's the
college kids,
crazy Professor Sanders. Go vote
for him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Colleges, yes.
DANTE CHINNI: But that's not
really everything
that's going on with him.
He has aspects to him that are
really -- that
are -- he's a prairie populist
in a lot of
ways. It's prairie populist.
He's winning
Kansas. He's winning these rural
parts of
Wisconsin, Nebraska. And, yes,
he wins big.
He wins the Pacific Northwest,
but he's winning
rural whites that kind of live
in the old
prairie populist areas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But he still is,
Ron, a significant
number of delegates behind
Hillary Clinton.
RON BROWNSTEIN: Right.
And that is because, if you look
forward,
you see where the challenge is.
He's a good
candidate for Kentucky, for West
Virginia,
for South Dakota, for Oregon.
But on the Democratic
side, the big states that award
the big trove
of delegate delegates are all
diverse.
And Sanders' campaign recognizes
that he has
-- he has obviously advanced far
from where
he started. But the hill that he
has to get
over to truly challenge her is
to crack the
diversity of the Democratic
Party. Without
that, he can't win a place like
California
or New Jersey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we are
going to
have to leave it there. It is
all fascinating,
and New York two weeks from
yesterday.
RON BROWNSTEIN: Yes. Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ron Brownstein,
Dante Chinni,
we thank you both.
RON BROWNSTEIN: Thanks for
having us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now, an
alarming new report
about the dramatic growth of
diabetes across
the globe.
The World Health Organization
said today that
an estimated 422 million people
are now suffering
from this chronic lifelong
disease.
William Brangham has more.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The WHO's
report tracked
the global rise of diabetes over
the last
40 years. And it showed a
quadrupling of the
number of cases worldwide. It's
now estimated
that 8.5 percent of adults in
the world have
the disease, and the costs are
tremendous.
An estimated 3.7 million deaths
every year
are linked to diabetes and
higher-than-normal
blood sugar levels.
The fastest growth of the
disease has been
in Africa, the Middle East and
Asia.
Joining me now is Dr. Etienne
Krug. He's the
World Health Organization's
point person for
dealing with diseases like
diabetes.
Dr. Krug, these are genuinely
shock numbers.
How do you explain this
incredible growth
of diabetes?
DR. ETIENNE KRUG, World Health
Organization:
Well, we have seen a steady
growth now for
several decades, which largely,
particularly
for people with type 2 diabetes,
is linked
to our changes in the way we eat
and changes
in our levels of physical
activity.
We are seeing more and more
unhealthy eating
and a reduction in physical
activity, which
contributes both to overweight,
which in turn
is a big cause of type 2
diabetes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We tend to
think of diabetes
as a disease that afflicts
wealthier nations,
but your report indicates that
poorer countries
are increasingly bearing a
bigger and bigger
burden.
DR. ETIENNE KRUG: For a long
time, diabetes
was considered the disease of
the rich countries.
This is not the case anymore,
and the report
clearly shows that rates are now
higher in
lower- and middle-income
countries than in
the high-income countries.
It is a total reverse of the
situation, what
it was. And the increase is
steeper in those
countries as well.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The health
impacts of diabetes,
as we described are, really
quite striking.
I'm wondering, do you have a
sense of the
economic cost of this disease?
DR. ETIENNE KRUG: The total cost
of treating
diabetes is more than $827
billion every year.
So, it's a very high number, and
that's only
the direct cost. It's not even
talking about
lost productivity, for example.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Diabetes
requires lifetime,
costly medical care. Do you have
any sense
of whether these nations have
the medical
infrastructure to deal with
these patients
over the rest of their lives?
DR. ETIENNE KRUG: Diabetes is a
disease that's
there to stay for the life of an
individual,
and it does require a lot of
different responses.
It's important to mention that a
lot of it
doesn't have to be costly. Just
through healthier
eating and more physical
activity, type 2
diabetes can be reduced quite a
bit. And it
is an issue that's important,
also, for type
1 diabetes.
But then we need to have access
to diagnostics
and to treatment. And, today, 23
percent of
the lower-income countries say
they don't
have a good, widespread access
to insulin,
for example, which is a
lifesaving medicine
for people with diabetes. And
that means we
need to work on supply chains,
making sure
those medicines reach even the
poorest countries
and the poorest corners of those
countries,
as well as on the prices,
because we know
that some types of insulin, for
example, are
too expensive.
And we have to make sure that
even poorest
people, who need them just as
much as the
rich ones, have access to them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's talk
about possible
remedies. What is it that can be
done? Is
it education? We have seen some
faltering
attempt here in the U.S. to try
to tax sugary
beverages. Mexico has done that.
The U.K.
is trying that. Is that a
possible solution?
DR. ETIENNE KRUG: It is a
combination of measures
that are needed.
Clearly, all of us have to make
an effort
in terms of healthier eating and
more physical
activity, but that is not going
to be enough.
And particularly when we look at
the poorest
countries, people don't have
access to the
information, but also don't
always have the
choice to eat healthily or to do
more physical
activity.
So, the governments have an
important role
to play in terms of providing
information,
but also making sure healthier
choices are
available. And that can be done
through legislation
in terms of content of food,
through taxation,
as you have mentioned. These are
important
measures that can work.
And then we need to also think
about our urban
planning, for example. One of
the causes to
overweight is urbanization.
People cannot
walk and cycle safely anymore to
work or to
school. And making sure our
cities are healthy
and provide opportunities for
safe walking,
cycling, physical activity in
general is extremely
important.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, Dr.
Etienne Krug
of the World Health
Organization, thanks very
much.
DR. ETIENNE KRUG: Sure. No,
thanks very much
for having us and supporting our
work.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
drones, satellites
and balloons, the tools to
predicting El Nino;
two views on whether there is
hope for Israeli-Palestinian
peace; plus, the urban workers
excluded from
India's economic prosperity.
But, first, this has been a
stronger season
than usual for the weather
pattern known as
El Nino, a phenomenon that
affects weather
all around the planet
Scientists and forecasters have
repeatedly
warned about its impact this
year. But they
still want to find out more
about it to better
gauge what it might do.
Science correspondent Miles
O'Brien went with
them to see what they're
learning.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's another
beautiful day
in sunny Hawaii. A Gulfstream G4
jet spools
up its engines and taxis for
departure.
The plane is the ultimate in
business jet
luxury, in this case minus the
luxury. Nicknamed
Gonzo, it is owned and operated
by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, NOAA,
and the business is scientific
research on
one of the most significant
weather patterns
on the planet, El Nino.
They make a beeline from good
weather to bad.
MAN: Positive rate. Gear up,
gear up. Heading
and altitude? Verified.
MILES O'BRIEN: The cabin is
filled with researchers
using sophisticated equipment.
They are part
of a scientific campaign on
multiple fronts,
deploying satellites, drones,
planes, balloons,
surface ships and buoys, all
focused on the
largest El Nino in nearly 20
years.
BILL PATZERT, NASA
Climatologist: El Ninos
come small, medium, large and
what I'm fond
of calling is Godzilla.
MILES O'BRIEN: Veteran NASA
climatologist
Bill Patzert has studied El Nino
his entire
career. He watches the weather
from a perch
in space via the Jet Propulsion
Lab in Southern
California. Launched in January,
the Jason-3
oceanography satellite is the
fourth in a
series NASA and the European
Space Agency
have deployed to monitor El Nino
and sea level
rise since the early '90s.
BILL PATZERT: When these events
impose themselves
on the climate system, everybody
on the planet
feels it. And the droughts,
floods are spectacular
and they're global.
MILES O'BRIEN: Here's what makes
an El Nino
tick: Normally, trade winds blow
from the
east westward across the Pacific
Ocean. This
creates a mound of water near
Indonesia that
is as much as 10 degrees warmer
and 1.5 feet
higher than the water off the
coast of Ecuador.
During an El Nino year, the
trade winds either
stop, or blow in the opposite
direction, transporting
the mound of warm water to the
east.
BILL PATZERT: So, it's a
tremendous redistribution
of heat. And so when this
happens, all the
pieces on the weather board are
rearranged.
MILES O'BRIEN: The unusually
warm water adds
heat and moisture to the air
above it, and
it rises, causing rain, often
torrential,
on the West Coast of the United
States and
in Central and South America.
At the other side of the
Pacific, the colder-than-normal
ocean leads to serious droughts
in Southeast
Asia, India and Africa. It's the
kind of weather
no one can ignore.
WOMAN: El Nino is threatening
parts of the
West this morning with more
dangerous weather.
Heavy rain and high winds will
take aim at
California.
MILES O'BRIEN: Strong El Nino
winds bring
colder temperatures and more
rain across the
Southern U.S., this year
triggering flooding
and mudslides in Texas,
Louisiana and Tennessee.
And it flattens out the northern
jet stream,
redirecting the flow of cold
polar air, resulting
in a milder winter for much of
the country.
Scientists are getting better at
predicting
an El Nino. They foresaw this
one six months
in advance, but there is still a
lot that
they don't know.
CHRIS FAIRALL, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric
Administration: This is not
rocket science.
It's much, much more difficult
than rocket
science.
MILES O'BRIEN: Chris Fairall is
a NOAA physicist.
He says one of the key
challenges is data,
or, more accurately, the absence
of it. El
Nino forms along the equator in
the Pacific,
as remote as any place on the
planet.
CHRIS FAIRALL: It's a gigantic
data void.
There's a huge area with no
islands, no land
stations, no radiosonde. And
it's extremely
active.
MILES O'BRIEN: That is what
makes this flight,
one of 22, so crucial. They are
now flying
45,000 feet above the equator.
MAN: I think the model's wrong,
which is part
of the mission here.
MILES O'BRIEN: Randy Dole is a
senior climate
and weather scientist with NOAA.
He and the
team are Hoovering data in the
place where
they have the least of it,
hoping to fix what
is broken in their model.
RANDY DOLE, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric
Administration: Some of the
errors were larger
than we might have even
anticipated. And this
affects not just the weather
models, but it
affects models that are used to
project U.S.
climate on a seasonal scale or
even globally
on the long-term.
MILES O'BRIEN: As they fly, they
gather data
left and right, aiming a
side-scanning radar
at nearby clouds to determine
how much moisture
they contain.
MAN: Three, two, one, drop.
MILES O'BRIEN: And they look out
below as
well, releasing a few dozen
dropsondes, which
transmit real-time snapshots of
temperature,
humidity, wind speed and
direction as they
fall toward the sea.
Dr. Dole is also very interested
in the connection
between El Nino and climate
change.
RANDY DOLE: There are several
papers that
suggest that -- that some of the
events like
the climate we're seeing may
become more frequent,
that is, extreme warm events in
the future.
This kind of mission or campaign
ultimately
provides data that will help to
improve the
models needed to understand that
question.
MILES O'BRIEN: Meanwhile, in
Pearl Harbor,
the crew of a NOAA research
vessel, the Ron
Brown, readies to set sail on a
month-long
voyage into El Nino waters.
MAN: Bridge copies all hands
aboard. Ship
to colors. Hundred RPMs on the
port.
MILES O'BRIEN: Lieutenant
Adrienne Hopper
is an operations officer in
NOAA's Commissioned
Corps.
LT. ADRIENNE HOPPER, NOAA
Commissioned Corps:
Increase speed to 400 RPMs.
Thrusters all
ahead 400.
MILES O'BRIEN: She and her crew
will be maintaining
several buoys along the equator
called the
Tropical Atmospheric Ocean
array. The TAO
buoys were deployed to better
understand El
Nino by gathering data just
above and below
the surface, and beaming it to
forecasters
via satellite.
LT. ADRIENNE HOPPER: So, this is
a temperature
and conductivity probe. This is
one of the
first probes that's immediately
below the
surface of the mooring
collecting temperature
and conductivity data. They go
down about
every 20 to 25 meters between
the surface
down to about 500 meters.
MILES O'BRIEN: And when you
think about El
Nino, this is kind of where the
rubber meets
the road, as it were, right?
LT. ADRIENNE HOPPER: Absolutely.
MILES O'BRIEN: This really is a
key point
to know what's going on
underwater and the
atmosphere immediately
surrounding it.
LT. ADRIENNE HOPPER: Absolutely.
Together.
MILES O'BRIEN: They hope to add
one more piece
to the puzzle on this voyage,
launching weather
balloons every three hours.
MAN: OK, one, two, three,
release.
MILES O'BRIEN: Designed to
gather the same
kind of data as those dropsondes
released
from 45,000 feet.
MAN: It was in the clouds
roughly right in
this period here.
MILES O'BRIEN: What goes up
apparently must
go down in this racket.
After deploying 27 dropsondes...
MAN: Landing gear is down. Three
green confirmed?
MAN: Confirmed.
MILES O'BRIEN: ... Gonzo comes
down eight
hours after leaving Honolulu.
The next day,
Dr. Dole debriefed the flight
for me.
RANDY DOLE: So, this is the
actual flight
plan track. That's in red. These
are dropsonde
points in the plan.
MILES O'BRIEN: On the left is
the forecast
model, what was predicted, and
on the right
is what we saw during the
flight.
RANDY DOLE: We want to see if in
fact this
model is right in predicting
that we should
have seen more activity on this
side even
than we saw in the eastern
portion, where
there was existing activity
already. So was
it going to develop here or not?
Three or
four model cycles had said it
was. So, let's
test it.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, based on this
flight, how
would you grade this model?
RANDY DOLE: Not very good. I'm a
hard grader,
but I won't give you a letter
grade on it,
but let's just say it didn't
happen.
My sense is that they should be
in good shape
if they turn, it looks like, at
about one
north, instead of at the
equator.
MILES O'BRIEN: They are seizing
the scientific
moment, hoping this is a perfect
opportunity
to make the model smarter. It
can't stop El
Nino's conveyor belt of
moisture, but it might
give us better warning.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Honolulu.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the next
conversation in
our occasional series in the
decades-old Israeli-Palestinian
conflict that we are calling The
Long Divide.
Tonight: whether there is reason
to be hopeful
that the peace process could
ever bear fruit.
And to John Yang.
JOHN YANG: For that, we have
tonight two men
we have hosted on the "NewsHour"
many times
over the years on this subject.
Hisham Melhem is a columnist for
the Al-Arabiya
news channel in Washington,
D.C., and a correspondent
for the Lebanese daily newspaper
An-Nahar.
And David Makovsky is a -- was a
senior policy
adviser to Secretary of State
John Kasich's
peace team for
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations
during 2013 and 2014 and is a
long-serving
fellow at the Washington
Institute for Near
East Policy.
To begin this series, Judy
Woodruff spoke
with Tom Friedman of The New
York Times. And
here's a little bit of what Tom
had to say
about the peace process.
THOMAS FRIEDMAN, The New York
Times: It's
actually been dead for a while.
I just called
it by its real name.
It's clear to me, Judy, that
both sides have
conspired. This was like "Murder
on the Orient
Express." There were so many
stab wounds in
this body, hard to tell exactly
which one
was the fatal blow.
JOHN YANG: David, we quickly
heard from you
in disagreement. So, explain why
you disagree
with Tom Friedman's analysis.
DAVID MAKOVSKY, Senior Fellow,
Washington
Institute for Near East Policy:
No, I think
Tom made a lot of good points,
so -- but I
think, the United States, we
have tried to
hit the home run ball three
times, Bill Clinton
in 2000, Condoleezza Rice in
2007-'8, and
the effort I was a part of with
Secretary
of State Kerry 2013-2014.
And I think what we see is that,
despite the
best efforts of the United
States, these guys
cannot do the home run ball. We
don't have
time to explain all the reasons,
but the point
is, is that I think we just have
to be more
modest in our objectives and try
to hit singles
and doubles, because whether
it's a lack of
leadership -- and, by the way,
even the great
leaders in the Middle East
deferred these
issues.
There's a reason why these
issues -- the can's
been kicked down the road, and
we have disbelieving
publics. They might say, I'm for
a two-state
solution, but I don't think the
other guy
is. And, third, we have got the
Middle East
in unprecedented turmoil, as the
"NewsHour"
has been chronicling, since the
Arab Spring
in 2011.
Taken all together, we could
just give up
and say let these guys kill each
other on
both sides, or we could say
maybe we have
to be more modest in our
objectives, maintain
the viability of a two-state
solution, even
if we can't implement it, keep
that door open,
so when the sides want to go
through that
door, they can.
I think there are some practical
ideas are
possible.
JOHN YANG: Hisham, is that
possible?
HISHAM MELHEM, Washington Bureau
Chief, Al-Arabiya
Television: Look, American
leadership is indispensable.
We have known that.
If you leave the parties to
their own devices,
given the asymmetry between
Israel and the
Palestinians, given the fact
that Israel has
tremendous military
preponderance, strong
economy, strong constitution,
you will end
up with two societies living
side by side
unequal and resentful of each
other, and in
a state of constant
low-intensity violence.
And if you allow the Israelis to
continue
settlement activities in
Palestinian territories,
incorporating more Palestinian
lands, even
when you work on the limited
objectives, OK,
then you will reach a point --
we may have
already reached it -- where
there will be
nothing to divide.
You have half-a-million Israelis
on Palestinian
land. And if you allow the
situation to continue,
then it is impossible to talk
about two-state
solution, and you will end up in
a situation
where you have these two unequal
societies
living in a state of perpetual
low-intensity
violence.
And that's the problem if you
maintain this
approach, let's contain it for a
while until
it ripens. But it may be too
late.
JOHN YANG: David, given the
situation now,
they can't hit the long ball, as
you say.
Can they even hit the single or
the double?
DAVID MAKOVSKY: Look, I don't
know, but we
have to try.
And my goal is not to contain or
to have a
status quo, but really to find a
way that
basically you channel the
settlement enterprise
into an area we already know; 80
percent of
the settlers own 5 percent of
the land largely
adjacent to the Israeli urban
areas we used
to call the pre-1967 border.
And most of the Palestinians are
on the other
side of that. And so we kind of
know, territorially,
where this is going, and there
will be a land
exchange, what we call a
territorial swap.
So, both sides know basically
what has to
be done. I do think you could
hit the single
or double. I just think the
stakes are so
high that, if we don't try, we
are basically
consigning these people to
perpetual bloodshed.
And if we try to hit the home
run ball a fourth
time, when we know these leaders
and publics
can't do it, we're setting
ourselves up for
failure.
JOHN YANG: But, Hisham, giving
up the settlement
blocs around the urban areas,
sounds like
that would be giving up East
Jerusalem. And
isn't the Palestinian goal of
having -- establishing
a capital in East Jerusalem?
Would that be
acceptable?
HISHAM MELHEM: Not to the
Palestinians, definitely.
I mean, Palestinians would like
to have East
Jerusalem as their capital, just
as the Israelis
could have West Jerusalem as
their capital.
This is a Palestinian position
that no Palestinian
leaders can even entertain not
having or not
insisting upon that.
The problem of what we're having
here is,
there are structural problems in
the Israeli
political culture. There are
powerful people
in Netanyahu's cabinet who are
calling for
annexing the West Bank. It is
not only the
settlements.
They believe that the
Palestinians cannot
accept the Israeli presence or
existence,
and, essentially, they are
asking the Palestinians
to accept the impossible. There
are forces
on both sides who are
maximalists now.
There was always a time when you
had an Israeli
constituency for peace and a
Palestinian constituency
for peace. These constituencies
have been
shrinking in the last few years.
And you have
the demonization taking place on
both sides
and maximalist positions on both
sides.
Hamas lives in its own world.
You have an
ossified Palestinian leadership.
And you have
an Israeli leadership that is
perpetuating
the status quo, unwilling or
unable, not courageous
enough to make initiative, given
the fact
that Israel is the stronger
party.
JOHN YANG: And talking about the
situation
in Israel, are there Israelis
who are willing
to look for that single?
DAVID MAKOVSKY: Yes.
JOHN YANG: Israeli leaders.
DAVID MAKOVSKY: You see half of
the Knesset,
half of the Israeli parliament,
is talking
about this openly.
And to your point on Jerusalem,
obviously,
Jerusalem has to be solved
between the parties.
You can't find -- you can't
impose any solution
and you can't just let it kind
of unilaterally
go in a certain director.
So, I think there's ground rules
you could
set that -- in East Jerusalem
that would preserve
the outcome of a solution. And,
by the way,
if you look at some of the
positions, the
Palestinians know that the
Jewish neighborhoods
will be Israel and the
Palestinian neighborhoods
will be Palestine.
So I see...
HISHAM MELHEM: But you want to
hear an Israeli
leadership articulate a position
like -- you
want to hear an Israeli leader
saying Jerusalem
should be shared.
You want to see an Israeli
leader saying,
this is our outlook and our
vision of eventual
peace. They don't do that. They
keep kicking
the can down the road.
DAVID MAKOVSKY: Part of the
problem is, you
have to realize, is these waves
of stabbings
that have radicalized the
situation.
You have had like 180 stabbings
on the Palestinian
side that have convinced the
Israelis there
is no partner, and the
Palestinians think,
we don't have a solution and we
will never
get to a solution.
(CROSSTALK)
JOHN YANG: Hisham Melhem, I'm
sorry. David
Makovsky, I'm afraid we have got
to leave
it there.
We will be coming back to this
discussion
many, many times again.
Thank you very much.
HISHAM MELHEM: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next, we begin a
series of
reports on India's work force.
Last year, the country became
the world's
fastest growing economy. But the
benefits
have eluded many of its
citizens.
Fred de Sam Lazaro has our first
report on
one group trying to reverse that
trend. It
is part of his ongoing series,
Agents for
Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The big
malls may have
arrived, but in India, food,
clothing and
virtually everything else is
still bought
mostly from street vendors.
They, along with construction
laborers, domestics,
rickshaw drivers and rickshaw
pullers, in
fact, most workers in India's
economy, are,
quite literally, off the books,
says Indiana
University's Sumit Ganguly.
SUMIT GANGULY, Indiana
University: Ninety
percent of the work force in
India is in the
so-called informal sector.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That could
be a technical
term that means a very hard
life. They live
from day to day. That is, if
there's work
on any given day, they are paid
at the end
of it, less than $2 for most of
them.
SUMIT GANGULY: These are people
who have no
Social Security provisions, who
have no health
care provisions, who can be
hired and fired
at will. And yet, according to a
recent Credit
Suisse study, it's close to --
they contribute
close to 50 percent of India's
gross national
product.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Not only are
they underappreciated,
but they fall easy prey to
corrupt officials.
The market outside of Delhi's
main mosque
has been here for more than 200
years. The
vendors complain that they're
subject to regular
harassment from police demanding
bribes or
from municipal authorities who
conduct regular
raids to evict them.
IMRAN KHAN, Vendor (through
translator): They
kicked us out from here in 2014,
citing security
reasons.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Across
India's cities,
vendors like Imran Khan carry
tales of harassment,
sometimes along with their own
video, of stalls
dismantled and merchandise
confiscated.
IMRAN KHAN (through translator):
Then finally,
we went to NASVI, to Arbind, and
he said,
you have only one option,
straight to court.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Social
activist Arbind
Singh founded NASVI the National
Association
of Street Vendors.
ARBIND SINGH, Founder, NASVI:
All those who
were kicked out, have them come
to the office
tomorrow.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: We ran into
Singh in another
Delhi market, where he was
getting the familiar
complaints from merchants.
ARBIND SINGH: We had gone to
court for these
vendors, and in recent days,
they are having
some trouble.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: They're
still be harassed?
ARBIND SINGH: Yes, yes, yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: For 20 years
since it
began, Singh's group has
organized various
informal workers. It lobbied
successfully
for a law to protect street
vendors, calling
for a zoning and permit system.
And until
it's in place, the court said no
one can be
evicted.
The problem, many officials
simply flout the
new law, preying on a population
that is poorly
educated and doesn't fully
understand it or
their rights.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: This
19-year-old said
he'd been in business for a
year, selling
this street food staple called
panipuri.
QUESTION: So, how much do they
take from you?
MAN (through translator): Who?
QUESTION: The municipality
people.
MAN (through translator):
Nothing. I don't
give any money.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He worried
at first about
reprisals, but did finally tell
us he bribes
the authorities about $1.50 each
time they
come round. That's a third to a
half of a
day's pay.
But protecting vendors like him
is only the
first step. The second is to
improve their
skills.
He's obviously untrained. He's
using his bare
hands. What would you do with
him?
ARBIND SINGH: Well, first thing
is that we
need to organize, so he becomes
part of the
organizing process. Then,
secondly, he goes
for the training.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: With help
from the tourism
ministry and the hospitality
industry, Singh's
organization has put thousands
of street food
vendors through training on food
preparation,
handling, service and storage.
Using street food festivals, the
group's message
to vendors is that with better
hygiene and
food safety, their business can
grow. But
Singh says the new economy,
geared very much
to the middle class, must begin
to help the
much larger number below it to
join it.
ARBIND SINGH: All what we need
in a country
like ours is equality of
opportunity that
is very much part of our
constitution, that
there has to be equality of all.
I mean, you
can get a loan for a car. You
can't get a
loan for buying a rickshaw.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Today, some
350,000 people
across India pay a small
membership fee to
belong to Singh's group.
MANOJ KUMAR RANE, India (through
translator):
We never did know the law. They
have helped
us to find our voice.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Manoj Kumar
Rane says
being organized has allowed
vendors in his
neighborhood to assert their
rights. There
are still reports of harassment
from the cops
and city people, he says, but
far fewer than
before.
Nidan has also started
micro-finance programs
and encouraged members to form
local co-opts
and savings clubs. Rani Harbans
Kaur helped
start this club, whose members
pool their
savings to make small loans.
Kaur, who's 40, has graduated
over the years
from a sidewalk stall to a
brick-and-mortar
store, thanks to a series of
small loans she
says she has easily repaid.
ARBIND SINGH: There was an
entrepreneur within
herself. We just unleashed that
with that
access.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And India
needs to provide
a lot more access and employment
to a growing
youthful population. The median
age is just
27.
Indiana University Professor
Ganguly:
SUMIT GANGULY: We're talking
about entire
armies of young men who are
unemployed or
underemployed, with expectations
which cannot
be reasonably fulfilled, unless
one sees a
greater dispersion of jobs and
wealth in India.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Most of
those young workers
will likely wind up fending for
themselves
in the informal economy. Arbind
Singh says
the social stability in this
land of 1.3 billion
may well depend on organizing
and protecting
them and converting many of them
into entrepreneurs.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in New Delhi.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In his next
report, Fred looks
at the plight of workers in a
remote rural
region where debt and a deadly
disease trap
many in poverty.
Fred's reporting is a
partnership with the
Under-Told Stories Project at
University of
St. Thomas in Minnesota.
Finally tonight: remembering the
country music
legend, and one of its outlaw
heroes, Merle
Haggard.
William Brangham is back with a
look at his
career.
MERLE HAGGARD, Musician: I guess
I will just
always be the old country
singer, you know,
the guy that sings about all the
things that
happen.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Merle Haggard
rose to country
music stardom singing about what
he knew best,
poverty, prison, heartache. Born
near Bakersfield,
California, Haggard was raised
in a converted
railway car, the only home his
parents could
afford.
He was 9 when his father died,
and before
long, he turned to petty crime
and landed
in San Quentin Prison, where he
saw Johnny
Cash play.
DON CUSIC, Belmont University:
Merle Haggard
lived outside the Law and got
thrown into
prison for it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Don Cusic is a
historian
of country music at Belmont
University in
Nashville.
DON CUSIC: If ever there was a
poster boy
for prison reform and prison
rehabilitation,
Merle Haggard would be exhibit
A.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Haggard turned
to writing
his own music after his release
in 1960, and
eventually scored hits with "The
Legend of
Bonnie & Clyde" and "Sing Me
Back Home," which
was an ode to his time in San
Quentin.
MAN: Merle would find prison
stories. He would
find a single parent, a single
father in holding
MAN: Merle would find prison
stories. He would
find a single parent, a single
father in holding
things together, fight inside of
me sticking
up for our country. Just -- he
was unabashed
about telling the truth.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That came
through most famously
in Haggard's 1969 hit "Okie From
Muskogee,"
which became a kind of
conservative anthem
at the height of the Vietnam
War.
DON CUSIC: It was an anthem for
the silent
majority for the middle class.
It was what
DON CUSIC: It was an anthem for
the silent
majority for the middle class.
It was what
the conservative -- in political
terms, conservative
movement, the conservative folks
were wanting
to say.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Haggard later
said he never
intended to be taken that way,
and later in
life, he turned anti-war
himself.
He also helped pioneer the
so-called outlaw
country genre, bucking the
highly polished
Nashville sound.
DON CUSIC: Haggard was an outlaw
in the sense
that he demanded creative
control. He didn't
do just what producers told him
to, lived
his own life, called his own
shots.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As his career
grew, the
accolades piled on, including
dozens of albums
and number one hits, album of
the year awards
and the Country Music Hall of
Fame. In 2010,
he was honored by the Kennedy
Center and at
a White House ceremony.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
In a day and age when so many
country singers
claim to be rambling, gambling
outlaws, Merle
actually is one.
(LAUGHTER)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Haggard also
continued performing
late into life. But a long
battle with pneumonia
forced him off the road this
year.
Here he is back in 1978
performing "Sing Me
Back Home" on the PBS series
"Austin City
Here he is back in 1978
performing "Sing Me
Back Home" on the PBS series
"Austin City
Limits."
(MUSIC)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Merle Haggard
died today,
on his 79th birthday.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Merle Haggard
died today,
on his 79th birthday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And before we
leave you tonight,
an update on Brazil's fight
against the Zika
virus.
The health ministry there says
the number
of confirmed and suspected cases
of microcephaly
has declined slightly. The
condition causes
babies to be born with
abnormally small heads.
Cases went down from 5,235 two
weeks ago to
5,092 just last week.
Later tonight on PBS program
"NOVA": the discovery
of what scientists believe is a
second Viking
settlement, proving the Norse
explorers traveled
farther into south into North
America than
previously thought. "NOVA" airs
tonight at
9:00 p.m. Eastern on most PBS
stations.
On the "NewsHour" online: Twenty
years ago,
a group of inmates at the Stock
Island Detention
Center in Key West, Florida,
adopted a family
of local ducks. Their efforts
grew into a
unique program where inmates now
care for
more than 150 animals, including
giant rabbits
and tiny horses. You can see
what it looks
like in a gallery by
photographer Kim Raff.
That's on our home page.
And on our science page, using
radioactive
dust buried at the bottom of the
oceans, two
teams of researchers have
identified the location
and dates of supernovas that
exploded near
Earth in the last 13 million
years. Why does
this matter? These massive
fireworks may have
had an effect on human
evolution. You can
read more about the cosmic
findings.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday, we talk with Anita
Hill. Her
sexual harassment accusations
against Clarence
Thomas in 1991 nearly derailed
his Supreme
Court nomination and are now the
focus of
a new movie.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.